We have an understanding of how our bodies have the capacity to self-heal, such as when you have a cut on your hand and it heals in a few days, says Shari B. Kaplan, LCSW, clinical social worker at Cannectd Wellness. The same is true of our psyche, she says.

“There is a natural intelligence in our body that will bring our body back to what is called homeostasis,” Kaplan describes. “In the context of mental health, it's about aligning with our true self—the compassionate, courageous, curious, creative part of us that has many strengths to overcome challenges, process emotions, and foster psychological resilience.”

Here, we’ll take a closer look at the process of self-healing, including how to do it, how to incorporate it into your life, and when to seek help from a mental health professional on your journey.

Mental Health Professionals That Provide Psychotherapy
Understanding the Self-Healing Process
Self-healing is about identifying areas in your life where you have experienced pain, trauma, or daily stressors/challenges. Then, it’s about coming up with practices in your daily life to promote healing.

How long the self-healing takes will vary from one person to another, but it’s important to recognize that self-healing is a process—one that isn’t meant to happen overnight.

“Remember, self-healing is a journey, not a destination,” Kaplan emphasizes. She urges people to be patient and compassionate with themselves as they explore self-healing practices and find what resonates with them.

She also emphasizes that you should not undertake the self-healing process without help. “It’s a journey that you do not need to take alone; we are wired for connection,” Kaplan says. Reaching out to a trusted professional when needed can—and in many cases, should—be part of your process.

Dr. Thornton stresses that self-healing works best when you are consistent and actively involved in the process. “A good metaphor for self-healing is how our bodies grow stronger after a workout,” she says. We know that the more energy we put into our workout, the stronger we can become.

“Similarly, the more that you actively invest in your well-being, the stronger, healthier, and more resilient it becomes,” Dr. Thornton explains.

According to Kaplan, the benefits of self-healing are numerous, and can include:

Increased resilience
Greater self-awareness
Improved emotional regulation
Increased feelings of empowerment, purpose, and worthiness
A more holistic understanding of well-being
A greater ability to recognize the interconnectedness of your mind, body, and spirit
Techniques and Strategies for Self-Healing
Self-healing is all about implementing healthy and sustainable routines into your daily life that enhance and support wellness and healing. It usually involves a multi-faceted approach, where you incorporate more than one healing modality into your life. The important thing is that these are practices that you enjoy and that you can be consistent with.

Think of it like any other goal—if the steps are unattainable or you don't like the changes you're making, it's not very likely you will stick to them.

Dr. Thornton shared her tips for activities to incorporate into your life for self-healing:

Add meditation into your daily routine, as quieting the mind through meditation and breathing are effective ways to manage stress and increase self-awareness.1
Consider journaling, because writing down feelings and thoughts has been shown to reduce anxiety, depression and PTSD in some studies.2
Establish a daily gratitude practice, which can increase life satisfaction, reduce anxiety and depression and help shift your mindset toward positivity.3
Incorporate physical activity into your day, which is known to boost your mood and decrease stress.4
Ensure that you are sticking to a healthy diet, because nourishing your body with balanced meals provides the nutrition and energy needed for you to feel mentally and emotionally well.5
Emphasize sleep hygiene, which involves prioritizing sleep, having a relaxing bedtime routine, and getting adequate sleep for your body each night.6
Scott AJ, Webb TL, Martyn-St James M, Rowse G, Weich S. Improving sleep quality leads to better mental health: A meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Sleep Med Rev. 2021;60:101556. doi:10.1016/j.smrv.2021.101556

Learn to set boundaries, which may involve saying “no” when necessary and prioritizing your own emotional well-being.
How to Ditch Poor Sleep Hygiene
Self-Healing for Mental Health
If you have a serious mental health condition, self-healing should not replace care by trained mental health professionals. However, it can be used alongside other mental health care you are receiving, and can increase your ability to heal and function at your best. It can be empowering to add self-healing practices into your wellness routines.

“It's very important to note that while self-healing techniques can be a powerful support system, they are not a replacement for professional treatment,” says Dr. Thornton. “If you're experiencing severe stress, anxiety, trauma, or depression, consult a licensed therapist or mental health professional for a personalized treatment plan.”

Dr. Thornton shared ideas for the role that self-healing can play in addressing some common mental health conditions.

Self-Healing for Stress and Anxiety
Mindfulness techniques like guided meditation and deep breathing can be especially useful for individuals with anxiety, as they help calm the nervous system and manage anxious thoughts, according to Dr. Thornton.71

Incorporating some techniques from cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), such as practicing identifying and challenging negative thought patterns, can also be helpful.8

Self-Healing for Depression and Mood Disorders
Depression and other mood disorders are usually primarily managed with therapy and/or medication. Still, adding in some adjunct therapies can be helpful as well. Dr. Thornton says that light therapy (phototherapy) can be helpful for people who experience seasonal depression, who would benefit from more regular sleep patterns, and who are looking to boost their mood.9

Other options Dr. Thornton recommends include positive self-talk and activity scheduling, which is where you plan activities to participate in that you previously enjoyed, and make a point of trying them even if you feel resistant.