 I must have justice, or I will destroy myself. And not justice in some remote
infinite time and space, but here on earth, and that I could see myself. I have believed in it.
I want to see it, and if I am dead by then, let me rise again, for if it all happens without me,
it will be too unfair. Surely I haven't suffered simply that I, my crimes and my sufferings,
may manure the soil of the future harmony for somebody else. I want to see with my own
eyes the hind lie down with the lion and the victim rise up and embrace his murderer. I
want to be there when everyone suddenly understands what it has all been for. All the religions of the world are built on this longing, and I am a believer. But then there are the children, and what am I to do about them? That's a question I can't answer. For the hundredth
time I repeat, there are numbers of questions, but I've only taken the children, because in
their case what I mean is so unanswerably clear. Listen! If all must suffer to pay for the
eternal harmony, what have children to do with it, tell me, please? It's beyond all comprehension why they should suffer, and why they should pay for the harmony. Why should
they, too, furnish material to enrich the soil for the harmony of the future? I understand
solidarity in sin among men. I understand solidarity in retribution, too; but there can be no
such solidarity with children. And if it is really true that they must share responsibility for
all their fathers' crimes, such a truth is not of this world and is beyond my comprehension.
Some jester will say, perhaps, that the child would have grown up and have sinned, but you
see he didn't grow up, he was torn to pieces by the dogs, at eight years old. Oh, Alyosha, I
am not blaspheming! I understand, of course, what an upheaval of the universe it will be
when everything in heaven and earth blends in one hymn of praise and everything that lives
and has lived cries aloud: 'Thou art just, O Lord, for Thy ways are revealed.' When the
mother embraces the fiend who threw her child to the dogs, and all three cry aloud with
tears, 'Thou art just, O Lord!' then, of course, the crown of knowledge will be reached and
all will be made clear. But what pulls me up here is that I can't accept that harmony. And
while I am on earth, I make haste to take my own measures. You see, Alyosha, perhaps it
really may happen that if I live to that moment, or rise again to see it, I, too, perhaps, may
cry aloud with the rest, looking at the mother embracing the child's torturer, 'Thou art just,
O Lord!' but I don't want to cry aloud then. While there is still time, I hasten to protect
myself, and so I renounce the higher harmony altogether. It's not worth the tears of that
one tortured child who beat itself on the breast with its little fist and prayed in its stinking
outhouse, with its unexpiated tears to 'dear, kind God'! It's not worth it, because those tears
are unatoned for. They must be atoned for, or there can be no harmony. But how? How are
211
Chapter 4 - Rebellion
you going to atone for them? Is it possible? By their being avenged? But what do I care for
avenging them? What do I care for a hell for oppressors? What good can hell do, since those
children have already been tortured? And what becomes of harmony, if there is hell? I want
to forgive. I want to embrace. I don't want more suffering. And if the sufferings of children
go to swell the sum of sufferings which was necessary to pay for truth, then I protest that
the truth is not worth such a price. I don't want the mother to embrace the oppressor who
threw her son to the dogs! She dare not forgive him! Let her forgive him for herself, if she
will, let her forgive the torturer for the immeasurable suffering of her mother's heart. But
the sufferings of her tortured child she has no right to forgive; she dare not forgive the torturer, even if the child were to forgive him! And if that is so, if they dare not forgive, what
becomes of harmony? Is there in the whole world a being who would have the right to forgive
and could forgive? I don't want harmony. From love for humanity I don't want it. I would
rather be left with the unavenged suffering. I would rather remain with my unavenged suffering and unsatisfied indignation, even if I were wrong. Besides, too high a price is asked
for harmony; it's beyond our means to pay so much to enter on it. And so I hasten to give
back my entrance ticket, and if I am an honest man I am bound to give it back as soon as
possible. And that I am doing. It's not God that I don't accept, Alyosha, only I most respectfully return him the ticket."
"That's rebellion," murmered Alyosha, looking down