July 1950 - I may never be happy, but tonight I am content. Nothing more than
an empty house, the warm hazy weariness from a day spent setting strawberry
runners in the sun, a glass of cool sweet milk, and a shallow dish of blueberries
bathed in cream. Now I know how people can live without books, without
college. When one is so tired at the end of a day one must sleep, and at the next
dawn there are more strawberry runners to set, and so one goes on living, near
the earth. At times like this I'd call myself a fool to ask for more...
2.
Ilo" asked me today in the strawberry field, "Do you like the Renaissance
painters? Raphael and Michelangelo? I copied some of Michelangelo once. And
what do you think of Picasso... These painters who make a circle and a little
board going down for a leg?" We worked side by side in the rows, and he would
be quiet for a while, then suddenly burst out with conversation, speaking with
his thick German accent. He straightened up, his tan, intelligent face crinkling up
with laughter. His chunky, muscular body was bronzed, and his blonde hair
tucked up under a white handkerchief around his head. He said, "You like Frank
Sinatra? So sendimental, so romandic, so moonlight night, Ja?"
3.
- A sudden slant of bluish light across the floor of a vacant room. And I knew it
was not the streetlight, but the moon. What is more wonderful than to be a
virgin, clean and sound and young, on such a night? ... (being raped.)"
4.
- Tonight was awful. It was the combination of everything. Of the play
"Goodbye My Fancy," of wanting, in a juvenile way, to be, like the heroine, a
reporter in the trenches, to be loved by a man who admired me, who understood
me as much as I understood myself. And then there was Jack, who tried so hard
to be nice, who was hurt when I said all he wanted was to make out. There was
the dinner at the country club, the affluence of money everywhere. And then
there was the record... the one so good for dancing. I forgot that it was the one
until Louie Armstrong began to sing in a voice husky with regret, "I've flown
around the world in a plane, settled revolutions in Spain, the North pole I have
charted... still I can't get started with you." Jack said: "Ever heard it before? So I
smiled, "Oh, yes." It was Bob." That settled things for me - - - a crazy record,
and it was our long talks, his listening and understanding. And I knew I loved
him.
5.
- Tonight I saw Mary. Jack and I were pushing out of the theater in a current of
people, and she was edging the other way in a dark blue jacket. I hardly
recognized her with her eyes downcast, her face made up. But beautiful. "I've
been looking all over for you," I said. "Mary. Call me, write me." She smiled, a
little like the Mary I used to know, and she was gone. I knew I would never have
a friend quite like her. So I went out in a white dress, a white coat, with a rich
boy. And I hated myself for my hypocrasy. I love Mary. Betsy is nothing but fun;
hysterical fun. Mary is me... what I would be if I had been born of Italian parents
on Linden Street." She is something vital, an artist's model, life. She can be rude,
undependable, and she is more to me than all the pretty, well-to-do, artificial
girls I could ever meet. Maybe it's my ego. Maybe I crave someone who will
never be my rival. But with her I can be honest. She could be a prostitute, and I
would not give a damn; I'll never deny her as a friend...
6.
- Today is the first of August. It is hot, steamy and wet. It is raining. I am
tempted to write a poem. But I remember what it said on one rejection slip: After
a heavy rainfall, poems titled RAIN pour in from across the nation.
7.
- I love people. Everybody. I love them, I think, as a stamp collector loves his
collection. Every story, every incident, every bit of conversation is raw material
for me. My love's not impersonal yet not wholly subjective either. I would like to
be everyone, a cripple, a dying man, a whore, and then come back to write about
my thoughts, my emotions, as that person. But I am not omniscient. I have to
live my life, and it is the only one I'll ever have. And you cannot regard your
own life with objective curiosity all the time...
8.
- With me, the present is forever, and forever is always shifting, flowing,
melting. This second is life. And when it is gone it is dead. But you can't start
over with each new second. You have to judge by what is dead. It's like
quicksand... hopeless from the start. A story, a picture, can renew sensation a
little, but not enough, not enough. Nothing is real except the present, and
already, I feel the weight of centuries smothering me. Some girl a hundred years
ago once lived as I do. And she is dead. I am the present, but I know I, too, will
pass. The high moment, the burning flash, come and are gone, continuous
quicksand. And I don't want to die.
9.
- Some things are hard to write about. After something happens to you, you go to
write it down, and either you over dramatize it or underplay it, exaggerate the
wrong parts or ignore the important ones. At any rate, you never write it quite
the way you want to. I've just got to put down what happened to me this
afternoon. I can't tell mother;n not yet, anyway. She was in my room when I
came home, fussing with clothes, and she didn't even sense that something had
happened. She just kept scolding and chattering on and on. So I couldn't stop her
and tell her. No matter how it comes out, I have to write it.
It rained all afternoon at the farm," and I was cold and wet, my hair under a
silk print kerchief, my red ski jacket over my sweatshirt. I had worked hard on
beans all afternoon and picked over three bushels. Since it was five o'clock,
people were leaving, and I was waiting beside the cars for my ride home. Kathy
had just come up, and as she got on her bike she called, "Here comes Ilo."
I looked, and sure enough, there he was, coming up the road in his old khaki
shirt with his familiar white handkerchief tied around his head. I was on
conversational terms with him since that day we worked together in the
strawberry field. He had given me a pen and ink sketch of the farm, drawn with
detail and assurance. Now he was working on a sketch of one of the boys.
So I called, "Have you finished John's picture?"
"Oh, ya, ya," he smiled. "Come and see. Your last chance." He had promised
to show it to me when he was done, so I ran out and got in step with him on his
way to the barn. That's where he lives.
On the way, we passed Mary Coffee. I felt her looking at me rather strangely.
Somehow I couldn't meet her eyes.
"Hullo, Mary," Ilo said.
"Hello, Ilo," Mary said in an oddly colorless voice.
We walked by Ginny, Sally, and a crowd of kids keeping dry in the tractor
shed. A roar went up as we passed. A singsong, "Oh, Sylvia." My cheeks burned.
"Why do they have to tease me?" I asked. Ilo just laughed. He was walking
very fast.
"We're going home in a little while," Milton yelled from the washroom.
I nodded and kept walking, looking at the ground. Then we were at the barn, a
huge place, a giant high ceilinged room smelling of horses and damp hay. It was
dim inside; I thought I saw the figure of a person on the other side of the stalls,
but I couldn't be sure. Without saying a word, Ilo had begun to mount a narrow
flight of wooden stairs.
"You live up there? All these stairs?"
He kept walking up, so I followed him, hesitating at the top.
"Come in, come in," he said, opening a door. The picture was there, in his
room. I walked over the threshold. It was a narrow place with two windows, a
table full of drawing things, and a cot, covered with a dark blanket. Oranges and
milk were set out on a table with a radio.
"Here," he held out the picture. It was a fine pencil sketch of John's head.
"Why, how do you do it? With the side of the pencil?"
It seemed of no significance then, but now I remember how Ilo had shut the
door, had turned on the radio so that music came out.
He talked very fast, showing me a pencil. "See, here the lead comes out, any
size." I was very conscious of his nearness. His blue eyes were startlingly close,
looking at me boldly, with flecks of laughter in them.
"I really have to go. They will be waiting. The picture was lovely."
Smiling, he was between me and the door. A motion. His hand closed around
my arm. And suddenly his mouth was on mine, hard, vehement, his tongue
darting between my lips, his arms like iron around me.
"Ilo, Ilo!" I don't know whether I screamed or whispered, struggling to break
free, my hands striking wildly, futiley against his great strength. At last he let me
go, and stood back. I held my hand against my mouth, warm and bruised from
his kiss. He looked at me quizzically, with something like surprised amusement
as he saw that I was crying, frightened. No one ever kissed me that way before,
and I stood there, flooded with longing, electric, shivering.
"Why, why," he made sympathetic, depreciating little noises. "I get you some
water."
He poured me out a glass, and I drank it. He opened the door, and I stumbled
blindly downstairs, past Maybelle and Robert, the little colored children, who
called my name in the corrupted way kids have of pronouncing things. Past
Mary Lou, their mother, who stood there, a silent, dark presence.
And I was outdoors. A truck was going by. Coming from behind the barn. In it
was Bernie - - - the horrible, short, muscular boy from the washroom. His eyes
glittered with malicious delight, and he drove fast, so I could not catch up with
him. Had he been in the barn? Had he seen Ilo shut the door, seen me come out?
I think he must have.
I walked up past the washroom to the cars. Bernie yelled out, "Why are you
crying?" I wasn't crying. Kenny and Freddy came by on the tractor. A group of
boys, going home, looked at me with a light flickering somewhere in their eyes.
"Did he kiss you?" one asked, with a knowing smile.
I felt sick. I couldn't have spoken if someone had talked to me. My voice was
stuck in my throat, thick and furry.
Mr. Tompkins came up to the pump to watch Kenny and Freddy run the old
stock car. They were nice, but they knew. They all must know.
"There's cutie pie," Kenny said.
"Cutie pie and angel face." Freddy said.
So I stood there, arms folded, staring at the whirring engine, smiling as if I
was all right, as if nothing had happened.
Milton sat in the rumble seat with me going home. David drove, and Andy
was in front. They all looked at me with that dancing light in their eyes. David
said in a stiff, strained voice, "Everybody in the washroom was watching you go
into the barn and making wisecracks."
Milton asked about the picture. We talked a little about art and drawing. They
were all so nice. I think they may have been relieved at my narrow escape; they
may have expected me to cry. They knew, though, they knew.
So I'm home. And tomorrow I have to face the whole damn farm. Good Lord,
It might have happened in a dream. Now I can almost believe it did. But
tomorrow my name will be on the tip of every tongue. I wish I could be smart, or
flip, but I'm too scared. If only he hadn't kissed me. I'll have to lie and say he
didn't. But they know. They all know. And what am I against so many...?